Create xr full screen effects doc page (#10727)
godotengine/godot-docs: tutorials/xr/xr_full_screen_effects.rst

.. _doc_xr_full_screen_effects:

XR full screen effects
======================

When adding custom full screen effects to your XR application, one approach is
using a full screen quad and applying effects to that quad's shader.
As a child to your :ref:`XRCamera3D <class_XRCamera3D>`,

> add a :ref:`MeshInstance3D <class_MeshInstance3D>` node

Author: Applied!

and set the ``mesh`` property to a :ref:`QuadMesh <class_QuadMesh>`.
Set the width and height of the quad to ``2``.

.. image:: img/xr_full_screen_effects_starting_quad.webp

You can then add a shader to your quad to make it cover the screen. This is done by setting the
vertex shader's ``POSITION`` built-in to ``vec4(VERTEX.xy, 1.0, 1.0)``.
However, when creating an effect that is centered straight ahead in the user's view
(such as a vignette effect), the end result may look incorrect in XR.

Below shows captures of the right-eye view with a vignette shader, both from the headset and the render target itself.
The left captures are an unmodified shader; the right captures adjust the full screen quad using the projection matrix.
While the capture on the left is centered in the render target, it is off-center in the headset view.

> But, after applying the projecton matrix, we see that the effect is centered in the headset itelf.

Author: Applied!

.. _doc_xr_full_screen_effects:

XR full screen effects
======================

> When adding custom full screen effects to your XR application, one valid approach is
> applying a full screen quad to the XR camera and applying effects to that quad's shader.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When adding custom full screen effects to your XR application, one approach is
using a full screen quad and applying effects to that quad's shader.
```

.. image:: img/xr_full_screen_effects_starting_quad.webp

Here is a simple vignette shader that you might apply to the quad, darkening the edges

> of a user's screen:

Reviewer: If we're not linking to https://docs.godotengine.org/en/latest/tutorials/shaders/advanced_postprocessing.html, then I think we need to include some more information than this, explaining:

1. The `MeshInstance3D` node they need to add, the size of the quad mesh, and to put it as a child of the camera. Some of this is shown in the images, but I think we should have it in words too.
2. That we're making it full screen by setting the `POSITION` in the shader. (This ends up being implied in the "Applying the projection matrix" section, but I feel like it'd be best to state it up front)

.. code-block:: glsl

  shader_type spatial;
  render_mode depth_test_disabled, skip_vertex_transform, unshaded, cull_disabled;

  void vertex() {
	  POSITION = vec4(VERTEX.xy, 1.0, 1.0);
  }

  void fragment() {
	  ALBEDO = vec3(0.0);
	  ALPHA = dot(UV * 2.0 - 1.0, UV * 2.0 - 1.0) * 2.0;

>   }

Reviewer: I'm not sure about including the incorrect shader code in full, because folks may not read very closely and just copy-paste this.

I think it may be better to only show full shader code for the correct one, and maybe put comments calling out the part that adjusts for the asymmetric projection matrix? Saying like, "if you remove this, the effect won't be correctly centered")

However, when creating an effect that is centered straight ahead in the user's view

> (such as the above vignette effect), the end result may look incorrect in XR.

Reviewer: This is shown wonderfully in the picture, but I think we should also say in words, why it doesn't look correct in XR (that the center of the rendered output we are producing isn't necessarily the center of the user's view in XR, because our output will be deformed to match the lenses of the headset)

Also, I think it would also be cool to show a screenshot from inside the headset showing how the correct and incorrect versions look, in addition to the screenshots of the render target texture. Maybe it could be shown in a 2x2 grid, with the headset image above the render target image? Otherwise, it might not be entirely clear that the off-center effect on the render target is actually the correct one that will look centered in the headset

Then, in the vertex function of our shader, we apply an offset from the projection matrix to
the inner vertices. Here's an example of how you might do this with the above simple vignette shader:

.. code-block:: glsl

  shader_type spatial;
  render_mode depth_test_disabled, skip_vertex_transform, unshaded, cull_disabled;

  void vertex() {
	  vec2 vert_pos = VERTEX.xy;

	  if (length(vert_pos) < 0.99) {
		  vec4 offset = PROJECTION_MATRIX * vec4(0.0, 0.0, 1.0, 1.0);
		  vert_pos += (offset.xy / offset.w);
	  }

	  POSITION = vec4(vert_pos, 1.0, 1.0);
  }

  void fragment() {
	  ALBEDO = vec3(0.0);
	  ALPHA = dot(UV * 2.0 - 1.0, UV * 2.0 - 1.0) * 2.0;
  }

.. note:: For more info on asymmetric FOV and its purpose, see this
          `Meta Asymmetric Field of View FAQ <https://developers.meta.com/horizon/documentation/unity/unity-asymmetric-fov-faq/>`_.

Limitations
-----------

Currently, full screen effects that require reading from the screen texture effectively disable all
rendering performance optimizations in XR. This is because, when reading from the screen texture,
Godot makes a full copy of the render buffer. Since this may create performance issues, it is recommended

> that custom effects be limited to per-pixel ones such as the above vignette shader.

Reviewer: I think it could be made a little clearer that this limitation _doesn't_ apply to the technique shown here. Having a "Limitations" section makes it sound like this is a limitation of what was shown above, rather than a limitation of a totally different way to approach doing this, which we didn't show :-)
